CloudPowering DH Research
- Chris Geroux

You wouldn’t take a cross-country road trip without knowing how to change a tire, why would you run a project in the cloud without knowing how to do a security patch? Learn the basic mechanics of cloud environments in this hands-on course and gain the confidence you need to carry-out today’s digital research projects. Whether you’re running a web site, scraping the web, blogging, or building a portal, being able to look under the hood to make quick assessments and fixes is essential.

This course begins by introducing cloud computing as a concept and the role it can play in your research, whether you need a persistently available computing environment for a web service, or more computing power than your laptop can offer for Big Data problems and anything in between. The first project we will cover is setting up a standard HTML based website in order to introduce all the basics of working in a cloud computing environment. We will then walk through using the command line and how it can be used to configure your cloud computing environment for your specific research projects. Mediawiki, Omeka, Joomla, Drupal, and WordPress are popular content management systems (CMS) that have almost identical deployment methods and so while we will choose one of these to introduce security topics such as data encryption and password management it will br representative of all these deployments.  Finally we will use cloud-based tools to automate the setup of your cloud computing environments allowing it to be duplicated, shared, and scaled up as needed.  With this general background covered you will have all of Thursday to deploy a cloud-based project of your own choosing.

In summary, once this week is over you’ll have experience deploying flexible, customized, web-based computing environments that can power your digital research projects.  It won’t make you a better road-tripper (sorry) but it will make you a better digital humanist.

This is a hands-on course. Consider this offering in complement with, and / or to be built on by: Wrangling Big Data for DH; Out-of-the-Box Text Analysis for the Digital Humanities; Stylometry with R; and more!
